example configurations for UI choices (#2398)
jupyterhub/zero-to-jupyterhub-k8s: doc/source/jupyterhub/customizing/user-environment.md

see {ref}`multiple-profiles`.
```

(user-interfaces)=

## Selecting a user interface

[JupyterLab][] is the new user interface for Jupyter,
which is meant to replace the classic notebook user interface (UI).

> While users already can interchange `/tree` and `/lab` in the URL to switch between
> the classic UI and JupyterLab if both are installed,
> Deployments using JupyterHub 1.x and earlier default to the classic UI,
> while 2.0 will make JupyterLab the default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users already can interchange `/tree` and `/lab` in the URL to switch between
the classic UI and JupyterLab if both are installed.
Deployments using JupyterHub 1.x and earlier default to the classic UI,
while JupyterHub 2.0 makes JupyterLab the default.
```

Reviewer 2: Are both these variations reasonable English? The latter feels more right to me.

`Users already can interchange` or `Users can already interchange`

Reviewer: The latter sounds better, I'll update my suggestion.

[jupyterlab]: https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io

> There are two things to customize, when picking the user interface to launch for users:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To pick a user interface to launch by default for users, two customization items need to be set:
```

> 1. the user interface (UI)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. the preferred default user interface (UI)
```

2. the server program to launch

> There are two main Jupyter server implementations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are two main Jupyter server implementations
```

> _Most_ deployments will not see a difference,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(_Most deployments will not see a difference,
```

> but there can be issues for certain server extensions.

Reviewer: Do you know of a good external page we could link to that explains the potential problems?

Author: I don't know of good docs covering what is likely to break, other than possible use of private APIs or assumptions not preserved across the transition. Most things are meant to work, and [this doc][] describes migrating an extension. I don't actually know of any examples of classic server extensions that don't work today with the new server. Maybe I should be softer and say something more like:

> Jupyter Server aims to be as backward-compatible as possible,
> so the vast majority of server extensions continue to work across the upgrade.
> If you experience issues, however, please report them to the Jupyter Server team,
> and you can use the classic server in the meantime.

[this doc]: https://jupyter-server.readthedocs.io/en/latest/developers/extensions.html#migrating-an-extension-to-use-jupyter-server

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
but there can be issues for certain server extensions. If unsure, new applications should choose `jupyter_server`._):
```

1. the modern `jupyter server`,
   which is launched when you use `jupyter lab` or other recent Jupyter applications, and
2. the 'classic' legacy notebook server (`jupyter notebook`)

In general, the default UI is selected in {term}`config.yaml` by

```yaml
singleuser:
  defaultUrl: ...
```

and the default server by:

```yaml
singleuser:
  extraEnv:
    JUPYTERHUB_SINGLEUSER_APP: "..."
```

> To select the modern server:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifically, use one of these options to select the modern server:
```

```yaml
# this is the default with JupyterHub 2.0
singleuser:
  extraEnv:
    JUPYTERHUB_SINGLEUSER_APP: "jupyter_server.serverapp.ServerApp"
```

or the classic notebook server:

```yaml
# the default with JupyterHub 1.x
singleuser:
  extraEnv:
    JUPYTERHUB_SINGLEUSER_APP: "notebook.notebookapp.NotebookApp"
```

You only need the above configuration when it is different from the default.
JupyterHub 2.0 changes the default server from `NotebookApp` to `ServerApp`,
so here we make the choice explicit in each example,
so the same configuration produces the same result with JupyterHub 1.x and 2.x.
That way, your choice will be preserved across upgrades.

(jupyterlab-by-default)=

## Use JupyterLab by default

:::{note}

> This will be the default in JupyterHub 2.0 and helm chart 2.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the default in JupyterHub 2.0 and Helm chart 2.0.
```

for this to work. All images in the [jupyter/docker-stacks repository](https://github.com/jupyter/docker-stacks/) come pre-installed with it.
```

(classic-by-default)=

### Use classic notebook by default

:::{note}
This is the default in JupyterHub 1.x and helm chart 1.x.
:::

If you aren't ready to upgrade to JupyterLab,
especially for those who depend on custom notebook extensions without an equivalent in JupyterLab,
you can always stick with the legacy notebook server (`jupyter notebook`):

```yaml
# the default with JupyterHub 1.x
singleuser:
  extraEnv:
    JUPYTERHUB_SINGLEUSER_APP: "notebook.notebookapp.NotebookApp"
````

This will start the exact same server and UI as before.

If you install the `nbclassic` package,
you can also default to the classic UI, running on the new server:
This may be the best way to support users on both classic and new environments.

```yaml
singleuser:
  defaultUrl: /tree/
  extraEnv:
    JUPYTERHUB_SINGLEUSER_APP: "jupyter_server.serverapp.ServerApp"
```

### Alternative interfaces

There are more Jupyter server extensions providing alternate UI choices,
which can be used with JupyterHub.

> For example, [retrolab][] is a different, built on JupyterLab,
> but which may be more comfortable for those coming from the classic Jupyter UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, [retrolab][] is a different notebook interface, built on JupyterLab,
but which may be more comfortable for those coming from the classic Jupyter UI.
```

[retrolab]: https://blog.jupyter.org/retrolab-a-jupyterlab-distribution-with-a-retro-look-and-feel-8096b8b223d0

To install such an extension:

> 1. install the package (`pip install retrolab` or `conda install retrolab`) in your user image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. install the package (`pip install retrolab` or `conda install retrolab`) in your user container image
```
